where did all the water come from on
earth when earth formed it would have
been the result of a heavy bombardment
an accretion process and all of that
energy and the fact that the core was
highly radioactive would have made it a
molten ball of lava to begin with and
way too hot to have had liquid oceans
all the water would have been boiled
away so it seems like quite a puzzle as
to explain where our oceans have come
from now to do that we need to
understand one more little thing about
the nature of isotopes of different
elements in discussing nuclear fusion
we've already talked about the ideas of
helium 3 and helium 4 and it depending
on the number of neutrons but just to go
over it again here's three isotopes of
carbon the ordinary carbon with six of
each six protons and six neutrons carbon
13 with an extra Neutron and carbon 14
with two extra neutrons that's
radioactive that's the one they use for
carbon dating but the same is true for
hydrogen you can have ordinary hydrogen
with just a proton as the nucleus you
can have deuterium with a massive - one
proton and one Neutron and tritium with
a mass of three because it's got two
neutrons and a proton in the center
again that's unstable they used to use
it for making glowing dials on watches
and things now deuterium we call it by a
special name rather than calling it
hydrogen - because really it's
sufficiently different that it does make
quite a bit of difference to its
behavior as a as an element in its own
right almost that doubling of the mass
is the most significant change between
two isotopes of any two elements
in fact is a little example the mass of
water consisting of D 2 O 2 to deuterium
sterner oxygen is 20 if you added up to
lots of 2 & 1 lots of 16 for the oxygen
compared to the 18 of ordinary water
mara that's only 10% but in the
wineglasses at the bottom there the one
on the right is ordinary water because
the ice is floating the one on the left
that's made with deuterium and it
changes the game completely and the AI
sinks instead a very very important
feature of ordinary water is that the
ice floats to the top and forms a
protective screen that then keeps the
rest of it liquid underneath and that
may well have been key to the survival
of life on Earth if the whole of the
earth's oceans has been made of heavy
water deuterium based things would have
been rather different but they're not
and in fact our oceans contain a hundred
and fifty six of those deuterium nuclei
for every million of the ordinary
hydrogen's
and it's interesting to compare that
with the rest of the universe and with
what Fred Hoyle would have predicted
from the Bang nucleosynthesis point of
view actually when the music stopped
when this chain of fusion was going on
suddenly the temperature cooled so that
these processes couldn't happen anymore
the amount of deuterium left was tiny
very very small indeed this is because
it's very easy for it to turn into
helium-3 that's a very quick process we
talked about that
so how much deuterium did the Big Bang
make when we look out there in the
universe now we find that
any deuterium get in the middle of stars
is destroyed and used up as fast as it's
made and so we can't really tell from
stars but if we look out at the rest of
the universe we find that 26 parts per
million
in other words 26 deuterium's for every
million hydrogen's is pretty much the
average composition out there of the
rest of the universe that we see really
quite a small fraction if we look at
Jupiter that consists well largely of
hydrogen in fact as other elements
present as well but if we look at the
hydrogen we find 26 parts per million of
deuterium compared to ordinary hydrogen
so it seems that Jupiter is pretty much
a ball of unmodified material which
shares the signature of the Big Bang
on earth it's much more than that it's a
hundred and fifty six time parts per
million knots 26 six times as much as
the universe at large a little bit
strange really and one of the
possibilities is that the lighter
hydrogen could escape out to space and
leak away slightly faster than the
heavier deuterium but it still begs the
question where did we get all of this
water from and one of the possibilities
is that it was delivered late after the
earth had cooled down by the impact of
comets that is comet hale-bopp and you
can see here at nucleus it's dust tail
and its secondary ion tail there amazing
photograph I remember when this was
visible in the sky almost every night
there's a picture of comet Halley that
was taken by the Giotto probe as it flew
past looking at the nucleus of the comet
in great detail and by these studies of
these objects from these various
missions the Comets are basically dirty
snowballs and that snow contains a lot
of water and you can see that in the
spectrum up to the right there
and so comets do fall to earth and they
do deliver some water to us we also get
hit by showers of meteorites and some of
these also contain the remnant fragments
of comets so we cannot have a look and
compare the amount of deuterium in the
Comets with the amount of deuterium we
find on earth and see if it matches that
would tell us the answer that our water
was coming from comets well hale-bopp
200 Halley's Comet 200 comet Hartley 161
now our ocean was 156 so yeah not too
bad a fit really this is looking good
then the Rosetta mission had a look at
67p cheering off Gerasimenko and it's
450 on that Comet answer three times as
much as we have so that doesn't really
sound like very good match at all well
one of the things we've got to remember
is the end of the Sun and the solar wind
on these objects is important if you
have any sort of gaseous atmosphere or
be it permanent or temporary around an
object the earth or a large comet then
that atmosphere it'll be at a particular
temperature and the energy of the
molecules will be distributed between
the different types equally so that they
all the types have the same energy so
law of physics will the equal partition
of energy and what this means is that
their speed of the lighter molecules
must be greater because the energy is
1/2 the velocity squared times the mass
and so if the velocity has to go up if
the mass goes down so you can see that
hydrogen will be moving faster than
helium faster than water and then
nitrogen and then oxygen at the same
temperature in a mixture of those gases
and what that means is you can look at
the escape velocity due to gravity of
the different objects in the solar
system and figure out whether or not
given their temperature they gases
should stay put or escape to space so if
we plot the positions with temperature
across the bottom and escape velocity at
the side you can see
it down at the bottom we've got the
little objects of the moon and Mercury
and pretty much everything manages to
escape even the relatively heavy carbon
dioxide molecules are moving fast enough
to get away then we have things like
Titan and Mars and Venus and they're
managing to hang on to things quite well
earth just outside the water line there
and Triton as well well they're both
below the helium and hydrogen escape
lines whereas the giant planets are not
they're much more massive and so they
manage to hang on to all of those gases
including the volatile ones so this kind
of explains really what we find in the
atmospheres of the
different planets quite well